From the New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Rachel Abrams and this is the daily.
>> After days of promising that a ceasefire
was near, President Trump late Sunday
announced [music] that he had reached a
deal with Iran.
Today, David Sanger, who spoke to the
president, explains what is and does not
included in the agreement and how much
closer it [music] gets both sides to
ending the war for good.
It's Monday,
>> [music]
>> June 15th.
David Sanger, thank you so much for
joining us.
>> Rachel, great to be with you.
>> [snorts]
>> It is 8:00 p.m. in New York. It's after
1:00 a.m. in London where you are right
now. So, thank you for making the time.
Tell us what you know about this very
late breaking deal with Iran.
>> Well, Rachel, as you know, this deal has
been brewing for a long time
and it's been subject to a lot of
up-and-down negotiations
between Iran and the United States even
as the war went from active combat to a
ceasefire
to that flare-up that we saw just in the
past week when the US resumed bombing of
Iran for several days.
And we thought for a while that that
might kill any hope of having what they
just agreed to on Sunday night,
which is a preliminary memorandum of
understanding.
That's really all they've done here.
An agreement to reopen the straight,
to end the blockade of Iran,
and to begin a serious conversation
about the nuclear program.
And in the end, the United States and
the Iranians all determined it was in
their interest to do that, to end the
fighting and get back to the talking.
>> And David, you actually spoke with the
president. Tell us about that
conversation.
>> I did, Rachel. It was a little bit of an
unexpected call. I'm here in London, as
you said, and around 4:30 in Washington,
about 9:30 here, the president called to
talk about the deal that he put together
and to celebrate it, to argue that it
was much better than what President
Obama had negotiated in 2015,
a negotiation that I followed closely at
the time.
>> deal that the president ripped up in his
first term, we should remind listeners.
>> Ripped up in his first term, criticized
harshly, and has criticized again even
on Sunday because he's very sensitive
about the argument that some Democrats
have made, and many nuclear experts have
made, that he hasn't gotten as much yet
from the Iranians as President Obama
did. And of course, President Obama did
not resort to war. So, the call was
mostly to make the argument that he'd
gotten something big here, something
that had remade the Middle East, and
something that will make the entire
region and Israel safe from an Iranian
bomb in the future.
>> I should note, David, that one of the
reasons this call, at least the
surprising to me a little bit, was that
it was not that long ago that you were
on Air Force One, and the president said
that your reporting on the war was
treasonous.
>> Yeah, well, Rachel, what can I tell you?
It's a hazard of White House reporting.
He would reacted badly to a series of
news analyses that made the point that
he had not yet accomplished his
political objectives, you know,
including ending the Iranian nuclear
program. And he still hasn't. But I I he
wanted to try to make the case, cuz I
think he cares about what the Times
reports, that he was on the road to
something that he believes will be
better than the Obama deal.
It'll be a while before we know whether
that's the case.
>> I think another takeaway from the fact
that he called you despite how angry he
was with you quite recently is that this
deal really matters to him. We have
talked on the show about how much the
president has been looking for an
off-ramp to this war. And I I I just
sort of wonder given all of that if you
can tell us a little bit about what his
mood was like. Did he seem, I don't
know, victorious at all?
>> He [snorts] sounded celebratory, and he
clearly thinks that he has found his
off-ramp.
Now, let's remember, Rachel, that when
he went into this war, the Strait of
Hormuz was open.
>> Mhm.
>> And it was running toll-free. One of the
things he wanted to tell me was that he
believes under this agreement Iran will
never impose tolls again. Of course, the
agreement itself, we believe, we haven't
seen the text of it, only refers to
suspending tolls for the next 60 days.
He also told me that he was convinced
that Iran would comply and reach the
next stage agreement on the nuclear
accord and talked about specific
provisions, but we have to remember, he
hasn't negotiated any of those positions
yet
>> Mhm.
>> with the Iranians. And he said that if
Iran didn't complete that deal, he would
either resume military action or begin
to have the United States patrol the
Gulf in return for 20% of all the
revenues, presumably mostly oil
revenues, that are received in the
region.
Well, that's a very different use of
American power in the Middle East. It's
also very Trumpian, right? So, he was
trying to make the case that the United
States was not only recovering, not only
had the blockade worked and the bombing
worked, but that he was on the way to
remaking the region.
>> Right. To your point, the threat of
demanding 20% of a country or region's
revenue seems like a very difficult
thing to calculate, let alone enforce.
But,
just to summarize, the points that he
did say to you seem to be things that
we've heard for a while. He is reopening
the Strait of Hormuz, there will be no
tolls, there will be a 60-day ceasefire,
this lifting of the blockade on Iranian
ports.
Have we heard from the Iranians in all
of this? Like, what is the status of
actually signing on the dotted line for
all of the parties involved?
>> As of the moment when we're speaking,
neither party has talked about actually
signing this agreement, although we're
told that there will be, if there hasn't
already been an electronic signing,
think a DocuSign for an international
agreement. And then, on Friday, in
Switzerland, a more formal signing that
presumably will include Vice President
J.D. Vance.
And that would probably be the beginning
of the negotiations
for the next phase.
>> Mhm.
>> But, what was unusual about the
president's call is that as he described
and walked me through the nuclear
agreements that he believed they were
going to reach, many of which we've
already written about in the in the past
few days, he was basically describing
agreements that he wanted to make sound
as if they had already been reached.
But, when pressed, acknowledged that
this is all subject to this later and in
my view, much more important document,
which would be much more like what the
Obama administration negotiated 11 years
ago. Specifics about whether or not Iran
can enrich uranium, whether it has to
give up its stockpile of nuclear fuel,
and so forth.
>> Okay, David, so a lot of unknowns as
you're explaining to us. Was there
anything else that struck you about the
call or the deal or anything else?
>> Well, one of the things that I thought
was surprising about the conversation
was that the president went out of his
way
to praise two authoritarian leaders
who we didn't think had a whole lot to
do with this final deal,
Vladimir Putin of Russia
>> Mhm.
>> and Xi Jinping of China.
And he praised them for essentially not
getting involved.
He was mildly critical
of the Europeans for offering to help
only after the fighting ended.
And he was deeply critical of Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel,
who went to extraordinary lengths to try
to keep this agreement from coming
together.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> David, we've talked a lot on the show
about how even though the United States
and Israel started this war together,
their interests have pretty quickly
diverged. We've seen that play out in
the negotiations in recent days. We've
seen that play out during the course of
the war.
Can you tell us a little bit more
specifically about how Prime Minister
Netanyahu has been a stumbling block to
this deal that we saw announced on
Sunday.
>> Well, Rachel, when the history of this
war is written,
the dynamic between the United States
and Israel is going to be one of the
most fascinating chapters. You'll
remember that it was Prime Minister
Netanyahu who made the case that if the
US and Israel attacked Iran together,
the country was so fragile
>> [snorts]
>> that the government would probably
collapse in about 3 days,
and that it would be taken over by
forces that Israel and the United States
would be able to control.
>> Mhm.
>> And it was at that time that the
president said to some of my Times
colleagues in other conversations,
"This is going to be like Venezuela."
And the only peace deal that he would be
interested in,
he said toward the beginning of the war,
was an unconditional surrender by Iran.
But as the war got more and more
complicated, and as the president needed
a way out of a conflict in which there
was going to be no quick victory, and
certainly no unconditional surrender,
he and Netanyahu began to separate.
And they separated in large part over
Netanyahu's insistence
that he continue the attacks on
Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Because the Iranians began to make the
case that the only ceasefire that they
would sign would be a whole regional one
that would also call off Israel's
ability to attack Hezbollah.
>> Mhm.
>> Now, if you ask American officials
around the president, that didn't mean
that Israel couldn't [snorts] defend
itself if attacked by Hezbollah. But the
splits you've seen in the past few weeks
have all been over Netanyahu's
insistence that he was going to finish
the job and crush Hezbollah in Lebanon.
>> Right. Israel does not want to be forced
into an agreement that prohibits them
from attacking what they see as an
existential threat.
>> That's absolutely right. And so, they
did not want to agree to any kind of
accord that would put limits on their
own military activity or even their
ability to strike Iran at some point in
the future.
This agreement is supposed to be a
regional agreement and includes a
commitment that the US would not
re-attack Iran and presumably that its
allies would not as well.
So, this turned into some screaming
fights between Netanyahu and Trump,
details of which began to leak out.
And the conversations didn't get any
easier and the president told me he had
really hard conversations with Netanyahu
in the past 48 hours
after Israel attacked Beirut and other
parts of Lebanon.
>> David, did President Trump tell you what
argument he is using to push Netanyahu
to fall in line?
>> Well, first, he told me that Netanyahu
was a very difficult guy, even while
making the case that the president's a
long-time supporter of Israel. But, the
president cast himself as the one who
had Israel's long-term interests in mind
more than Netanyahu did. He said, "To
me, to be honest with you, he should be
very thankful for us for doing this
because if Iran had a nuclear weapon,
Israel wouldn't be around for 2 hours."
>> Did the president tell you why he thinks
that this time will be different? Like,
why Netanyahu will listen to him and not
continue attacks against Iran and its
proxies?
>> He didn't. And the Israelis have made it
pretty clear that they're not going to
be bound to an agreement to which they
weren't a party. They weren't involved
in the negotiations, and yet the
Iranians are making the case that this
agreement applies not only to the United
States,
but to all of its allies.
>> Mhm.
>> But,
at the end of the day, Israel's ultimate
guarantor of security is the United
States. And its ultimate supplier of
arms is the United States. And while the
president has never threatened either
one of those,
you can imagine that amidst what we are
told are cursing matches between these
two pretty strong-willed leaders,
is the underlying threat that if Israel
doesn't go along, the United States'
commitment may in some ways weaken. And
we know that the president in recent
weeks has basically made the case to
Netanyahu that he's lost a generation of
Americans whose views of Israel are
nowhere near what they were in President
Trump's generation.
>> That is really interesting, and I feel
like I should pause here because I want
to remind people that this is, at the
end of the day, not a formal peace deal,
right? Everything we're talking about is
a memorandum of understanding. So, it's
essentially an agreement to engage in
further talks. And I wonder, David, you
are a White House correspondent, you are
a national security expert. So, given
all of what you have far on this war,
how durable do you think this agreement
actually is?
>> You know, I think this is as durable as
each side ultimately decides to make it.
The fact of the matter is that a
memorandum of understanding doesn't have
any particular enforceable capability.
This isn't a peace deal, as you said.
It's not a nuclear deal.
It's more like a table of contents, as
one of the president's aides put it to
me, for what needs to be negotiated
next. Now, it does have a couple of more
specific limitations. For example, it
says in the memorandum of understanding
that Iran is going to have to rid itself
of its nuclear stockpile and begin to
blend that down to a form that can't be
used in nuclear weapons. But, it's a
long way from that general statement to
saying who's going to dig this out from
under the rubble in Iran, who's going to
go melt it down, and who's going to have
possession of the nuclear material later
on. So, it's not really an enforceable
document.
And it's very possible that the Iranians
think this is all they need to get
through 2 and 1/2 more years of the
Trump administration. And that they'll
worry about the next steps, which will
be lengthy and difficult to execute,
when they see who's the next president.
>> David, you have made the points to us
before on this show that the demands
from the White House about what they
want in order to reach a ceasefire have
shifted, or what their goals are for
this war have shifted, such that what we
might actually see if this war ended is
simply a return to the status quo before
it began.
Now that you've spoken to the president,
and given what you know about what might
be included in this deal, I just want to
ask you, has your assessment shifted?
>> It hasn't shifted much, Rachel. In the
course of more than 4 months of war, we
certainly have seen the United States
succeed at destroying a good deal of
Iran's missile capability. Not all of
it, but a good deal. It has indeed sunk
the Iranian navy. There wasn't much of
one, but it's gone.
It has certainly wiped out what was left
of the Iranian Air Force.
But this agreement largely gets us back
to where we were before the war started,
which is to say with the Strait of
Hormuz open, assuming it happens as the
president describes and expects,
without a blockade of Iranian ports,
and with a negotiation over the nuclear
program resuming in Switzerland.
Now, it does raise one interesting
question though, Rachel.
While the president said to me that he
wants to make sure the nuclear material
that's in Iran gets dug up from beneath
the rubble of the facilities that were
attacked a year ago by the US Air Force,
he didn't sound like he was in a huge
rush.
And he thought that the United States
could keep an eye on it,
that from satellites and from other
means, we can make sure the Iranians
don't use it to produce a weapon.
But if we don't have an urgent reason to
get it out, it [music] does raise the
question,
why did this war happen to begin with?
Because the overarching justification
for the war
at the time was that Iran was just weeks
or months away from being able to build
a weapon.
In other words, did we need to have
these three months of violence and
incredible disruption?
Or was there another way to get to where
we find ourselves today?
>> [music]
>> David Sanger, [music] thank you so much.
>> Thanks, Rachel. Great to be with you.
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
For the first time in 53 years, the New
York Knickerbockers won the NBA
championship, beating the San Antonio
Spurs in game five of the finals on
Saturday night.
The Knicks won the series four to one
after trailing by double digits in each
of their victories, twice mounting
[music] seemingly impossible comebacks.
They were led by the incomparable Jalen
Brunson, [music]
a 6-foot-2 guard who overcame and
outplayed the tallest man in basketball,
Victor Wembanyama, to give New [music]
York the title and to bring raucous,
ebullient joy to a city where many
people had lost hope of seeing this
particular hometown [music] victory in
their lifetime.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode [music] was produced by
Mooj Zadie, Alex Stern, and Adrian Ma.
It was edited [music] by Michael Benoist
and Patricia Willens.
Contains music by Alicia B YouTube and
Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly [music]
and this episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. [music]
See you tomorrow.